All right. You've written a program that can apply
the Kalman filter to real life localization problems. You're a champ.
It takes skills and patience to get this far.
However, we've got a little bit further to go.
If you recall the assumptions under which the Kalman filter operates,
are that the motion and measurement functions are linear,
and that the state can be represented by a unimodal Gaussian distribution.
Well, it turns out that these assumptions are very limiting,
and would only suffice for very primitive robots.
Most mobile robots will execute non-linear emotions.
For example, moving in a circle or following a curve.
So, what can we do if our Kalman filter can't be applied to most robotics problems?
Let's take a look at why we can't apply the Kalman filter
in more detail and maybe we'll find some answers there.
Here's a prior distribution.
A unimodal Gaussian distribution with a mean of mu,
and a variance of sigma squared.
When this distribution undergoes a linear transformation,
for instance the function y equals ax plus b,
the resulting distribution looks like so.
This posterior distribution is a Gaussian with a mean of amu plus p,
and a variance of a squared sigma squared.
This is precisely what can happen in a state prediction.
The important thing to note is that a linear transformation
that takes a Gaussian distribution as an input,
will always have a Gaussian distribution as an output.
Now, what happens if the transformation is nonlinear?
Let's look at another example.
Once again, the prior distribution is a unimodal Gaussian distribution,
with a mean of mu and a variance of sigma squared.
But now, the function f of x is clearly non-linear.
The resulting distribution is no longer a Gaussian as can be identified from its shape.
In fact, the distribution cannot be computed in closed form.
Meaning, in a finite number of operations.
Instead, to model this distribution,
many thousands of samples must be collected according to the prior distribution,
and pass through the function f of x to create this posterior distribution.
What used to be a simple algebra or matrix manipulation,
has become much more computationally intensive,
which is not the responsiveness that the Kalman filter is known for.
So, what can we do?
Well, if you look closely,
and I mean really closely, let's zoom in,
you may notice that for very short intervals,
the function f of x may be approximated by a linear function.
This will allow us to use the Kalman filter on this nonlinear problem.
The linear estimate is only good for a small section of the function,
but if it is centered on the best estimate,
the mean and updated with every step,
it turns out that it can produce sufficiently accurate results.
The mean can continue to be updated with a nonlinear function.
But the covariance must be updated by a linearization of the function f of x.
To calculate the local linear approximation,
a Taylor series can be of help.
If you're not familiar with the Taylor series,
the Taylor series Wikipedia page provides
a great summary along with some helpful visualizations.
A function can be represented by the sum of
an infinite number of terms as represented by this formula.
This is called the Taylor series.
However, an infinite number of terms is not needed.
An approximation can be obtained by using just a few of the terms.
And a linear approximation can be obtained by
using just the first two terms of a taylor series.
This linear approximation centered around the mean,
will be used to update the covariance matrix of the prior state Gaussian.
Let's take a look back at our non-linear example and apply the linearization.
The taylor series can be simplified to a linear equation,
one of the form y equals ax plus b,
and the transformation can be applied to the prior.
The results is precisely what we wanted, a Gaussian.
It will inevitably have an error.
You can see that the posterior Gaussian distribution
is quite different from the distribution that you saw before.
However, the tradeoff is in the simplicity and speed of the calculation.
Let's recap what the differences are between ekf and kf.
To begin with, either the state transformation function,
measurement function, or both, are nonlinear.
These nonlinear functions can be used to update the mean,
but not the variance,
as this would result in a non-Gaussian distribution.
For this reason, locally
linear approximations are calculated and used to update the variance.
Before you dive into the formulas for ekaf,
it's important to generalize the process for
multidimensional state transition or measurement and function.